# Citation classification pipelines

This repository inludes a collection of Python pipelines that classify how papers cite these five distance estimation papers by Bailer-Jones et al.:

- Bailer-Jones 2023: Estimating Distances from Parallaxes. VI. A Method for Inferring Distances and Transverse Velocities from Parallaxes and Proper Motions Demonstrated on Gaia Data Release 3
- Bailer-Jones et al. 2021: Estimating Distances from Parallaxes. V. Geometric and Photogeometric Distances to 1.47 Billion Stars in Gaia Early Data Release 3
- Bailer-Jones et al. 2018: Estimating Distance from Parallaxes. IV. Distances to 1.33 Billion Stars in Gaia Data Release 2
- Astraatmadja & Bailer-Jones 2016: Estimating Distances from Parallaxes. III. Distances of Two Million Stars in the Gaia DR1 Catalogue
- Astraatmadja & Bailer-Jones 2016: Estimating Distances from Parallaxes. II. Performance of Bayesian Distance Estimators on a Gaia-like Catalogue
- Bailer-Jones 2015: Estimating Distances from Parallaxes

All of these pipelines have mostly been generated by ChatGPT (GPT-4). Below you can find a short description of each of the pipelines: 

## classify_citations_zeroshot_1cat.py

Applies the "MoritzLaurer/deberta-v3-large-zeroshot-v2.0" model from Hugging Face. This model is pre-trained and determine whether a hypothesis is "true" or "not true" for citation context. There is only one category and thus hypothesis, given by: 

"The authors adopt or use distance values from Bailer-Jones et al. in their analysis, tables or figures. They do not just cite Bailer-Jones et al. for background, methodology, a passing mention or other non-distance reasons."

The input are all papers in a folder named "ads_papers" in the same directory. 
The output is in the output_zeroshot_1cat.csv file with the following columns: 

"bibcode","citation_context_no" ,"citation_context","target_reference" ,"predicted_label","distance_used_score"

"bibcode" contains the bibcode of the paper. 
"citation_context_no" is important if the papers are cited more than once, it consecutively numbers the citation context.
"citation_context" is the whole snippet of text surrounding the citation. The number of characters before and after a citation is 400 by default can be adjusted with char_window in the extract_anchored_context function in functions.py. 
"target_reference" indicates which of the six distance estimation papers is being cited in the context. 
"predicted_label" tells us the predicted label, in this case: "uses_distance_catalogue" and "does_not_use_distance_catalogue", depending on whether the distance_used_score is larger or smaller than 0.5.
"distance_used_score" indicates the confidence score of the classification model. 


## classify_citations_zeroshot_2cat.py 

Uses the same model as classify_citations_zeroshot_1cat.py, only that it adopts two hypotheses between which the model has to decide (multiple labels forbidden). The hypotheses are: 

"The authors adopt or use distance values from Bailer-Jones et al. in their analysis, tables or figures." and 
"The authors cite Bailer-Jones et al. only for background, methodology, a passing mention or other non-distance reasons."

The output file is output_zeroshot_2cat.csv and is almost the same: 

"bibcode", "citation_context_no","citation_context","target_reference", "predicted_label", "distance_used_score", "distance_not_used_score"

This additionally includes the "distance_not_used_score". 


## classify_citations_zeroshot_3cat.py 

Uses the same model as classify_citations_zeroshot_1cat.py, only that it adopts three hypotheses. Multiple hypotheses are allowed to be true, so the score does not add up to 1 in the end. The hypotheses are: 

"The authors adopt or use distance values from Bailer-Jones et al. in their analysis, tables or figures.", 
"The authors cite Bailer-Jones et al. for methodology, they either use, discuss, extend or alter the method by Bailer-Jones et al." and 
"The authors cite Bailer-Jones et al. for background, a passing mention or other non-distance reasons and non-methodology reasons."

The output file is output_zeroshot_3cat.csv: 

"bibcode", "citation_context_no","citation_context","target_reference", "predicted_label","distance_used_score", "methodology_score", "other_score"

## classify_citations_textgen_2cat.py

Uses the the pre-trained text-generation model "Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct". It either generates the text "uses_distance_catalogue" or "does_not_use_distance_catalogue". The prompt is: 

"You are classifying the function of a scientific citation of Bailer-Jones et al.

Decide whether the citation context below shows that the authors adopt or use numerical distance values from Bailer-Jones et al., or if the citation is used only for background or other reasons.

IMPORTANT:
- Only classify as "uses_distance_catalogue" if the authors clearly adopt or compute using distance values from Bailer-Jones et al. or use distance values in a table or figure.
- If ambiguous, classify as "does_not_use_distance_catalogue".

Citation context:

{context}

Respond with exactly one label:
uses_distance_catalogue
or
does_not_use_distance_catalogue"

The output is output_textgen_2cat.csv. Its headers are analogous to classify_citations_zeroshot_1cat.py and classify_citations_zeroshot_2cat.py, only without scores. 

--> would not use this, since it takes more than a minute to classify each context without improving the result. 

## classify_citations_sentiment.py

Uses the pre-trained model 'ProsusAI/finbert' for a sentiment analysis: positive, negative and neutral.

Output in output_setiment.py. Besides the usual headers, there is "sentiment_result", which can be "positive", "negative" or "neutral", and "score", which tells us how confidently the model has decided on that sentiment. 

## quality_check.ipynb

Notebook that compares the example outputs for the same random test set of 100 papers stored in the [...]_test.csv files, that has also been manually analyzed in comparison_file.csv.  

# Other files: 

## download_pdfs.py

Run to download all .pdf papers that cite the 6 distance estimation papers from NASA ADS into the ads_papers folder. For some papers, e.g. if they are not accessible directly via ads or if they take too long to download, they have to be downmloaded manually. 

## functions.py

Contains general functions for extracting the citation contexts from pdf files and cleaning its format. 




